ggplot2 3.5.0 `coord_radial()` blog (#684)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/ggplot2-3-5-0-coord-radial/index.Rmd

* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

```{r ragg, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(dev = "ragg_png")
```

We are happy to announce the release of [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org) 3.5.0.
This is one blogpost among several outlining a new polar coordinate system.
Please find the [main release post](/blog/2024/02/ggplot2-3-5-0/) to read about other exciting changes.

Polar coordinates are a good reminder of the flexibility of the Grammar of Graphics: pie charts are just bar charts with polar coordinates.
While the tried and tested `coord_polar()` has served well in the past to fulfill your pie chart needs, we felt it was due some modernisation.
We realised we could not adapt `coord_polar()` to fit with the [new guide system](/blog/2024/02/ggplot2-3-5-0/#guide-rewrite) without severely breaking existing plots, so `coord_radial()` was born to give a facelift to the polar coordinate system in ggplot2.

Relative to `coord_polar()`, `coord_radial()` can:

1. Draw circle sectors instead of only full circles.
1. Avoid data vanishing in the centre of the plot.
1. Adjust text angles on the fly.
1. Use the new guide system.

## An updated look

> The first noticeable contrast with `coord_polar()`, is that `coord_radial()` is not particularly suited to building pie charts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first noticeable contrast with `coord_polar()` is that `coord_radial()` is not particularly suited to building pie charts. 
```

By setting the `start` and `end` arguments separately, you can now make a partial polar plot.
This makes it much easier to make semi- or quarter-circle plots.

```{r partial_polar}
#| fig.alt: >
#|  Two polar scatterplots of the 'mpg' dataset. The left plot is shaped like
#|  as a semicircle and the right plot as a quarter circle.

p <- ggplot(mpg, aes(displ, hwy)) +
  geom_point()

half <- p + coord_radial(start = -0.5 * pi, end = 0.5 * pi) +
  ggtitle("−0.5π to +0.5π")
quarter <- p + coord_radial(start = 0, end = 0.5 * pi) +
  ggtitle("0 to +0.5π")
half | quarter
```

## Donuts

It was already possible to turn a pie-chart into a donut-chart with `coord_polar()`.
This is made even easier in `coord_radial()` by setting the `inner.radius` argument to make a donut hole.
For most plots, this avoids crowding data points in the center of the plot: points with a widely different `theta` coordinate but similarly small `r` coordinate are placed further apart.

```{r open_radial_plot}
#| fig.alt: >
#|  A donut-shaped scatterplot of the 'mpg' dataset.
p + coord_radial(inner.radius = 0.3, r_axis_inside = TRUE)
```

## Text annotations

> A grievance we noticed about polar coordinates, is that it was cumbersome to rotate text annotations along with the `theta` coordinate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common grievance with about polar coordinates is that it was cumbersome to rotate text annotations along with the `theta` coordinate.
```
